# Projects

Here are some projects I'm working on.

=> //gmid.omarpolo.com gmid - fast, small and secure Gemini server
(If you're browsing this page over gemini this is the server that you're talking to.)  A simple, secure, Gemini server for static content with CGI and FastCGI support.  Written for fun with libtls.

=> //telescope.omarpolo.com Telescope - a w3m-like Gemini browser
Telescope is a w3m- and Emacs-inspired Gemini browser.

=> //kamid.omarpolo.com kamid - free, easy-to-use and portable 9p daemon
kamid is a FREE, easy-to-use and portable implementation of a 9p file server daemon for UNIX-like systems with a strong focus on security and correctness.

=> vc-got.gmi           Emacs VC backend for Game of Trees
=> https://gameoftrees.org/  See also: Got VCS
Got (shorts for “Game of Trees”) is a version control system. vc-got is an attempt to bring Got to Emacs.

=> /dots/  My dotfiles
It’s not really a project *per se*, but it’s nice to share.

=> star-platinum.gmi    star-platinum - take control of your applications, one key at the time
It's a keybinding manager for X11.  It lets you assign keys on other application and bind custom action to them.  You can execute external commands or send fake keys.  I'm using it to "emacs-ify" firefox, but can do more.

=> webpkg.gmi		WebPKG - web-interface for the OpenBSD ports collection
CGI script to search for and visualise package from the OpenBSD port tree.  Supports full-text search across the whole catalogue.

=> crest.gmi            CREST - see your rest endpoints
Interactive REPL for HTTP requests with a simple and intuitive language.

=> sam-el.gmi           sam.el - An editor for the best OS
sam.el is an implementation of the text editor sam from plan9 for emacs.  It's still far, far away from being usable.

=> mymenu.gmi           mymenu – a menu of mine
mymenu is a graphical menu for X11.  It reads items from standard input (one per line) and present a window where the user can choose one (or more) item.  It’s similar to dmenu, except it’s better (IMHO).
